docs: Update docs for release of Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 (#13427)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/api-gateway/upgrade-specific-versions.mdx

This topic describes how to upgrade Consul API Gateway.

> ## v0.3.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Upgrade to v0.3.0 from v0.2.1 or lower
```
Right?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Upgrade to v0.3.0 from v0.2.0 or lower
```

> Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from lower versions. Gateways with `listner` with a `certificateRef` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows `Gateways` from the gateway's namesapce to use `certificateRef` in the `certificateRef`'s namespace.

Author: ```suggestion
Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from lower versions. Gateways with `listeners` with a `certificateRef` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows `Gateways` from the gateway's namesapce to use `certificateRef` in the `certificateRef`'s namespace.
```

> Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from lower versions. Gateways with `listner` with a `certificateRef` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows `Gateways` from the gateway's namesapce to use `certificateRef` in the `certificateRef`'s namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 introduces a breaking change. Gateways with `listner` with a `certificateRef` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows `Gateways` from the gateway's namesapce to use `certificateRef` in the `certificateRef`'s namespace.
```
Aren't all upgrades from a lower version?
Also, is it `certificateRef` or `certificateRefs`?

### Requirements

Ensure that the following requirements are met prior to upgrading:

- Consul API Gateway should be running version v0.2.1 or lower.
- You should have the ability to run `kubectl` CLI commands.
- `kubectl` should be configured to point to the cluster containing the installation you are upgrading.
- You should have the following permission rights on your Kubernetes cluster:
  - `Gateway.read`
  - `ReferencePolicy.create`
- (Optional) The [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) command line processor for JSON can be installed, which will ease gateway retrieval during the upgrade process.

### Procedure

1. Verify the current version of the `consul-api-gateway-controller` `Deployment`:

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl get deployment --namespace consul consul-api-gateway-controller --output=jsonpath= "{@.spec.template.spec.containers[?(@.name=='api-gateway-controller')].image}"
  ```

  You should receive a response similar to the following:

  ```log
  "hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:0.2.1"
  ```

> 1. Retrieve all gateways that have a `certificateRef` in a different namespace. If you have installed the [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) utility, you can skip to [step 4](#jq-command-secrets). Otherwise, issue the following command to get all `Gateways` across all namespaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Retrieve all gateways that have a `certificateRefs` in a different namespace. If you have installed the [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) utility, you can skip to [step 4](#jq-command-secrets). Otherwise, issue the following command to get all `Gateways` across all namespaces:
```
The field is plural based on the examples. We should do a search and replace.

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl get Gateway --output json --all-namespaces
  ```

>     If you have any active `Gateways`, you will receive output similar to the following response. The output has been truncated to show only relevant fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Active `Gateway`s appear in the output response. The output in the following example has been truncated to show only relevant fields:
```

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: Gateway
  metadata:
    name: example-gateway
    namespace: gateway-namespace
  spec:
    gatewayClassName: "consul-api-gateway"
    listeners:
      - name: https
        port: 443
        protocol: HTTPS
        allowedRoutes:
          namespaces:
            from: All
        tls:
          certificateRefs:
            - group: ""
              kind: Secret
              name: example-certificate
              namespace: certificate-namespace
  ```

1. Inspect the `certificateRefs` entries for each of the routes.

>   If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `certificateRef` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the parent `Gateway`, then no additional action is required for the `certificateRef`. Otherwise, note the `namespace` field values for `certificateRef` configurations that have a `namespace` defined that do not match the namespace of the parent `Gateway`. You must also note the `namespace` of the parent gateway. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace certificateRef-to-gateway pair. (see [step 5](#create-secret-reference-policy)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `certificateRefs` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the parent `Gateway`, then no additional action is required for the `certificateRefs`. Otherwise, note the `namespace` field values for `certificateRefs` configurations with a `namespace` field that do not match the namespace of the parent `Gateway`. You must also note the `namespace` of the parent gateway. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace certificateRefs-to-gateway pair. (see [step 5](#create-secret-reference-policy)).
```

  ```

  The output will resemble the following response if gateways that require a new `ReferencePolicy` are returned:

  <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

  ```log hideClipboard
  {
    "gateway_name": "example-gateway",
    "gateway_namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "kind": "Gateway",
    "crossNamespaceSecrets": {
      "group": "",
      "kind": "Secret",
      "name": "cexample-certificate",
      "namespace": "certificate-namespace"
    }
  }
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  If your output is empty, proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade).
<a name="create-secret-reference-policy"/>

1. Using the list of secrets you created earlier as a guide, create a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) to allow each gateway cross namespace secret access.

>   The `ReferencePolicy` explicitly allows each cross-namespace gateway to secret pair. The `ReferencePolicy` must be created in the same `namespace` as the `certificateRef`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `ReferencePolicy` explicitly allows each cross-namespace gateway to secret pair. The `ReferencePolicy` must be created in the same `namespace` as the `certificateRefs`.
```

  <CodeBlockConfig filename="referencepolicy.yaml">

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: ReferencePolicy
  metadata:
    name: reference-policy
    namespace: certificate-namespace
  spec:
    from:
      - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
        kind: Gateway
        namespace: gateway-namespace
    to:
      - group: ""
        kind: Secret
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

1. If you have already created a `ReferencePolicy`, modify it to allow your gateway to access your `certificateRef` and save it as `referencepolicy.yaml`. Note that each `ReferencePolicy` only supports one `to` field and one `from` field (refer the [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/api-types/referencepolicy/#api-design-decisions) documentation). As a result, you may need to create multiple `ReferencePolicy`s.

1. Issue the following command to apply it to your cluster:

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl apply --filename referencepolicy.yaml
  ```

  Repeat this step as needed until each of your cross-namespace `certificateRefs` have a corresponding `ReferencePolicy`.

  Proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade).

> ## v0.2.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Upgrade to v0.2.0
```

> Consul API Gateway v0.2.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from Consul API Gateway v0.1.0. Routes with a `backendRef` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows traffic from the route's namespace to the `backendRef`'s namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul API Gateway v0.2.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from Consul API Gateway v0.1.0. Routes with a `backendRefs` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows traffic from the route's namespace to the `backendRef`'s namespace.
```

This topic describes how to upgrade Consul API Gateway.

## v0.3.0

> Consul API Gateway v0.3.0 introduces a breaking change for people upgrading from lower versions. Gateways with a `secret` defined in a different namespace now require a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) that explicitly allows `Gateways` from the gateway's namesapce to use `Secrets` in the secret's namespace.

Reviewer 3: Let's avoid "introduces a breaking change", @trujillo-adam can you help with the messaging?

### Requirements

Ensure that the following requirements are met prior to upgrading:

- Consul API Gateway should be running version v0.2.1 or lower.
- You should have the ability to run `kubectl` CLI commands.
- `kubectl` should be configured to point to the cluster containing the installation you are upgrading.
- You should have the following permission rights on your Kubernetes cluster:
  - `Gateway.read`
  - `ReferencePolicy.create`
- (Optional) The [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) command line processor for JSON can be installed, which will ease route retrieval during the upgrade process.

### Procedure

1. Verify the current version of the `consul-api-gateway-controller` `Deployment`:

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl get deployment --namespace consul consul-api-gateway-controller --output=jsonpath= "{@.spec.template.spec.containers[?(@.name=='api-gateway-controller')].image}"
  ```

>   You should receive the following response:

Author: Since we aren't guaranteed that readers are upgrading from our most recent release,

```suggestion
  You should receive a response similar to the following:
```

I'd also consider adding a note to the effect of
> If you are upgrading from an older version, please follow the upgrade guides in order for each version released since.

  ```log
  "hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:0.2.1"
  ```

1. Retrieve all gateways that have a secret in a different namespace. If you have installed the [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) utility, you can skip to [step 4](#jq-command-secrets). Otherwise, issue the following command to get all `Gateways` across all namespaces:

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl get Gateway --output json --all-namespaces
  ```

>   If you have any active `Gateways`, you will receive output similar to the following response. The output has been truncated to show only relevant fields:
> 
>   ```yaml
>     apiVersion: v1
>     items:
>     - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
>       kind: HTTPRoute
>       metadata:
>         name: example-http-route,
>         namespace: example-namespace,
>         ...
>       spec:
>         parentRefs:
>         - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
>           kind: Gateway
>           name: gateway
>           namespace: gw-ns
>         rules:
>         - backendRefs:
>           - group: ""
>             kind: Service
>             name: web-backend
>             namespace: gateway-namespace
>             ...
>           ...
>     - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
>       kind: TCPRoute
>       metadata:
>         name: example-tcp-route,
>         namespace: a-different-namespace,
>         ...
>       spec:
>         parentRefs:
>         - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
>           kind: Gateway
>           name: gateway
>           namespace: gateway-namespace
>         rules:
>         - backendRefs:
>           - group: ""
>             kind: Service
>             name: web-backend
>             namespace: gateway-namespace
>             ...
>       ...
>   ```

Reviewer 3: This is rendered incorrectly

<img width="993" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7556325/174875907-076a5e76-9aee-4998-86ad-6b7c9fc845b8.png">

````suggestion
    If you have any active `Gateways`, you will receive output similar to the following response. The output has been truncated to show only relevant fields:

  ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    items:
    - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
      kind: HTTPRoute
      metadata:
        name: example-http-route,
        namespace: example-namespace,
        ...
      spec:
        parentRefs:
        - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
          kind: Gateway
          name: gateway
          namespace: gw-ns
        rules:
        - backendRefs:
          - group: ""
            kind: Service
            name: web-backend
            namespace: gateway-namespace
            ...
          ...
    - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
      kind: TCPRoute
      metadata:
        name: example-tcp-route,
        namespace: a-different-namespace,
        ...
      spec:
        parentRefs:
        - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
          kind: Gateway
          name: gateway
          namespace: gateway-namespace
        rules:
        - backendRefs:
          - group: ""
            kind: Service
            name: web-backend
            namespace: gateway-namespace
            ...
      ...
  ```
````

1. Inspect the `secret` entries for each of the routes.

>   If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `secret` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the parent `Gateway`, then no additional action is required for the `secret`. Otherwise, note the `namespace` field values for `secret` configurations that have a `namespace` defined that do not match the namespace of the parent `Gateway`. You must also note the `namespace` of the parent gateway. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace secret-to-gateway pair to prevent the route from breaking (see [step 5](#create-secret-reference-grant)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `secret` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the parent `Gateway`, then no additional action is required for the `secret`. Otherwise, note the `namespace` field values for `secret` configurations that have a `namespace` defined that do not match the namespace of the parent `Gateway`. You must also note the `namespace` of the parent gateway. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace secret-to-gateway pair to prevent the route from breaking (see [step 5](#create-secret-reference-policy)).
```

  After completing this step, you will have a list of all secrets similar to the following:

  <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

  ```yaml hideClipboard
    example-secret:
      - namespace: secret-namespace

>         parentNamespace: gateway-namespace
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        parentNamespace: gateway-namespace
```

  ```
  </CodeBlockConfig>

  Proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade) if your list is empty.
<a name="jq-command-secrets"/>

1. If you have installed [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/), issue the following command to get all `Gateways` and filter for secrets that require a `ReferencePolicy`.

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl get Gateway -o json -A | jq -r '.items[] | {gateway_name: .metadata.name, gateway_namespace: .metadata.namespace, kind: .kind, crossNamespaceSecrets: ( .metadata.namespace as $parentnamespace | .spec.listeners[] | select(has("tls")) | .tls.certificateRefs[] | select(.namespace != null and .namespace != $parentnamespace )  )} '

>   ```

Reviewer 5: Fixed.

  The output will resemble the following response if gateways that require a new `ReferencePolicy` are returned:

  <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

  ```log hideClipboard
  {
    "gateway_name": "example-gateway",
    "gateway_namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "kind": "Gateway",
    "crossNamespaceSecrets": {
      "group": "",
      "kind": "Secret",
      "name": "secret-name",
      "namespace": "secret-namespace"
    }
  }
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  If your output is empty, proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade).

> <a name="create-reference-grant-secret"/>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<a name="create-reference-policy-secret"/>
```

1. Using the list of secrets you created earlier as a guide, create a [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) to allow each gateway cross namespace secret access.
  The `ReferencePolicy` explicitly allows each cross-namespace gateway to secret pair. The `ReferencePolicy` must be created in the same `namespace` as the `Secret`.

  Skip to the next step if you've already created a `ReferencePolicy`.
  <!---
  TODO: add link to our docs on Cross Namespace Reference Policies, once we have written then, and tell the user to see them for more details on how to create these policies.
  --->
  The following example `ReferencePolicy` enables `example-gateway` in `gateway-namespace` to utilize secrets in the `secret-namespace` namespace:

  <CodeBlockConfig filename="referencepolicy.yaml">

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: ReferencePolicy
  metadata:

>     name: reference-grant

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    name: reference-policy
```

1. Inspect the `backendRefs` entries for each of the routes.

>   If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `backendRef` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the route, then no additional action is required for the `backendRef`. Otherwise, note the `group`, `kind`, `name`, and `namespace` field values for `backendRef` configurations that have a `namespace` defined that do not match the namespace of the parent route. You must also note the `kind` and `namespace` of the parent route. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace route-to-service pair to prevent the route from breaking (see [step 5](#create-reference-grant)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  If a `namespace` field is not defined in the `backendRef` or if the namespace matches the namespace of the route, then no additional action is required for the `backendRef`. Otherwise, note the `group`, `kind`, `name`, and `namespace` field values for `backendRef` configurations that have a `namespace` defined that do not match the namespace of the parent route. You must also note the `kind` and `namespace` of the parent route. You will need these to create a `ReferencePolicy` that explicitly allows each cross-namespace route-to-service pair to prevent the route from breaking (see [step 5](#create-reference-policy)).
```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  If your output is empty, proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade).

> <a name="create-reference-grant"/>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<a name="create-reference-policy"/>
```

  apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: ReferencePolicy
  metadata:

>     name: reference-grant

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    name: reference-policy
```

  ```

  Repeat this step as needed until each of your cross-namespace routes have a corresponding `ReferencePolicy`.

  Proceed with the [standard-upgrade](#standard-upgrade).

## Standard Upgrade

> ~> **Note:** When you see `VERSION` in examples of commands or configuration settings, replace `VERSION` with the version number of the release you are installing, like `0.2.0`. If there is a lower case "v" in front of `VERSION` the version number needs to follow the "v" as is `v0.2.0`

Reviewer: 1. See the comment I left RE: this callout on /consul-api-gateway-install.mdx
2. Shouldn't the standard upgrade be the first type on the page? 
3. These upgrade types are big enough that I probably would have put them on separate pages.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to leave this page as is for right now. My current thinking is to move version-specific upgrade instructions to the Release Notes for that version. This page would then contain only the "standard" upgrade instructions with a big warning to review the Rel Notes before proceeding.
